🌱 Make Cluster.spec.topology.controlPlane.replicas optional (#4993)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/202105256-cluster-class-and-managed-topologies.md

      Metadata ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    
      // The number of control plane nodes.
      // If the value is nil, the ControlPlane object is created without the number of Replicas
      // and it's assumed that the control plane controller does not implement support for this field.

>       // +optional

Reviewer: Same as above comment around ignoring unsupported Replicas field in Control Plane providers.

>       // +optional
>       Replicas int `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // +optional
      Replicas *int `json:"replicas,omitempty"`
```

       ```
    1. For the ControlPlane object in `cluster.spec.topology.controlPlane`
    1. Initializes a control plane object using the control plane template defined in the `ClusterClass.spec.controlPlane.ref field`. Use the name `<cluster-name>`.

>     1. If `spec.topology.controlPlane.replicas` is set, set the number of replicas on the control plane object to that value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Checks if the control plane object implements support for the Replicas field. If yes, sets the number of replicas on the control plane object from `spec.topology.controlPlane.replicas`, else ignore the field.
```

Reviewer 3: How can we check if a control plane provider supports this field? (afaik it doesn't have to be set in e.g. the KubeadmControlPlaneTemplate) (I know we could inspect the CRD, but I hope we don't want to do that)
Related to: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4993/files#r675694890

Reviewer 4: We are not checking if the provider support this field, but we are going to act according to what is specified in topology.replica

> // If the value is nil, the ControlPlane object is created without the number of Replicas  
> // and it's assumed that the control plane controller does not implement support for this field.

Reviewer: Ignoring unsupported fields (which are not mandatory in the contract) makes the end-user UX a bit easier. And maybe adding a logger or an event (though this legitimately might be overkill) to surface the fact to the end-user is also something we could look into.

Reviewer 2: For now the current text is actually what it can be done technically in the first iteration. @srm09 We should open an issue to make it better later, right now it's probably not something we can do easily.

Reviewer 4: Opened https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5019 to track this discussion

##### For Control plane providers
Similarly, a control plane provider should also create a template for use of creation for the control plane objects. For instance, the kubeadm control plane provider should introduce the notion of a KubeadmControlPlaneTemplate for use by the cluster controller to create a managed Kubeadm Control plane object.

> The CAPI Cluster Controller would use this template to instantiate a control plane object for the topology. With the introduction of ClusterClass which is responsible for handling the kubernetes version too, the current contract needs to be expanded to include the support for `version` in the `spec` fields. The control plane templates can optinally also support `replicas` in `spec` and its value will be set to `cluster.spec.topology.controlPlane.replicas`.

Reviewer 3: I think the whole paragraph has to be rephrased a bit. The current state of the contract (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4949/files) specified the following 3 optionally supported "features":
* version
* replicas
* Machines

I think the intention is now (afaik):
* we only support ControlPlanes which support version
* depending on the ControlPlane, we optionally support replicas and machines

Author: We can probably make the wording better but the current statement reads says that the `version` in `spec` is needed.
> current contract needs to be expanded to include the support for `version` in the `spec` fields.

AFAIK, when it comes to machine, this information is captured (optionally) in `ClusterClass.ControlPlaneClass` and we do not capture any such information under `cluster.spec.tolopology.controlPlane` - isnt it?

Reviewer 3: It currently states that the contract should be expanded. Imho this is the PR which expands the contract: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4949/files

And I think when #4949 has been merged. The current version of the ClusterClass proposal on this PR does not really make clear that ClusterClass only supports ControlPlane provider which support version. (But I might be totally wrong about all that). Let's wait for feedback from @fabriziopandini or @vincepri .

Reviewer 4: Is it ok if I'm going to open a separated issue/PR to clarify this point as well as the conventions that providers have to follow when developing new templates (so we can keep track on comments on the various PRs)

Reviewer 3: :+1:

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5018
